Toki Pona as a language is somewhat limiting, so we need a customized version
of it with some unique syntax extensions.

This modified version of Toki Pona ("The Simple Language") that is designed for
use in stories will be known as Toi Sona ("The Story|Knowledge Language").

The language features of Toki Sona that separate it from Toki Pona include...

1. Words that are used as adjectives for nouns and adverbs for verbs must be
  hyphenated and attached to the noun/verb in question.
  Previous: tomo tawa
  New: tomo-tawa 
  Trans:   "car", lit. a [moving] [enclosed space]

2. The "en" usage limit is escalated from tying 3 concepts together to having
  no such restriction.
  Previous: ona pi ma en ona en sina ------- li wile moku.
  New: ona pi ma en ona en sina en mi en ali li wile moku.
  Trans: The people of Earth and him/her and you and me and everyone wants to eat.

3. To enhance the noun modifier "pi" that is used to tie 2 noun concepts
  together, for example, suwi-telo pi kon-lete (lit. "sweet fluid of cold air",
  e.g. hot chocolate), we will now be able to "en" multiple pi's together like:
  [noun pi something en pi something]
  Previous: tomo-telo ni li jo supa-telo pi kiwen-jelo ----------------!
  New: tomo-telo ni li jo supa-telo pi kiwen-jelo en pi telo-tawa-nanpa!
  Trans: That bathroom has golden toilets with electronically sprayed water!

4. To enable adjective phrases to be used to describe a noun or in order to
  compare verbs to each other, I am adding the grammar particle "po". It 
  
- Revamped noun descriptions: "pi" is used to mark a noun #2 to further
  detail a noun #1. I am adding "po" to mark a verb to describe the same noun
  #1. Any associated content is then suffixed with "la" to mark its ending, 
  followed by a continuation of the sentence with "li" (if needed).
  Previous: 
  New: 
  Trans: 

- To enable verb phrases to be used to describe a noun, I am adding the 
  I am adding the grammar particle "po". It 
  functions exactly like the way "pi" does, only the target of "pi" must be a
  noun while the target of "po" must be a verb.
  Example: ona po pali lon tenpo-suno li jo ali pona-suli.
  Trans: People that work during the day have a much better life.

5. Toki Pona has no proper nouns, only proper adjectives. These are accomplished
  by invoking Custom words (manual words added to the core language) as
  descriptors for Core nouns. This becomes a problem, however, when the name of
  something itself spans multiple words, for example "Eiffel Tower".
  A construction of some kind is "tomo", so how might we do tomo-"Eiffel Tower"?
  I'd prefer not to use quotes in that manner as it becomes too complicated.
  For clarity purposes, I am doing concatenation with upper-case letters, so
  UpperCamelCase for the programmers reading this.
  Example: tomo-EiffelTower li suli-mute!
  trans: The Eiffel Tower is huge!
  
6a. To allow additional layers of description, I am adding a syntax rule that 
  allows "pi" to target not just nouns, but a noun phrase (which itself can
  have a single additional level of "pi"). So, something matching the form...
  [noun1 pi noun2 pi noun3] where noun3 describes noun2 which then describes
  noun1.
  Example: ona-suli pi tomo-tawa pi moni-mute
  Trans: The big person of the very expensive cars (The big guy who has swanky cars)
  vs.
  Example: ona-suli pi tomo-tawa en pi moni-mute
  Trans: The big person of the cars and of wealth (The big guy with tons of money and cars)
   
6b. To maintain clarity with #3/#4 in combination with these nested "pi" phrases,
  we will also need to mandate that, when returning from such nested phrases to
  combine with an "en", "en pi" or "en po" phrase, you'll need to include a comma
  to separate the nested statement from the original one.
  Example: ona-suli pi tomo-tawa pi moni-mute, en po lon poka pi tomo-moni
  Trans:  The big guy of the very expensive cars who lives next to the bank
  vs.
  Example: ona-suli pi tomo-tawa pi moni-mute po lon poka pi tomo-moni
  Trans: The big guy of the very expensive cars that are parked next to the bank

Samples in this document will follow the form:
1. Plain English
2. Toki Sona Translation
3. TokiSonized English

---Samples---

1. Usually, the neighboring car salesman, who sometimes borrows my car, is somewhat trustworthy.
2. tenpo-mute, jan-poka pi pana pi tomo-tawa, en po kepeken tenpo-lili e tomo-tawa-mi li jo nasin-pali pi pona-lili.
3. Many times, neighbor of (exchanges of cars) that uses sometimes my car, has a (way of doing) that's (kinda good).

1. The person leaving the bathroom, who didn't wash their hands, and the person entering the bathroom both say, "Hi~".
2. ona tawa pi tomo-telo en po telo-ala e luka en ona kawa li toki "Pona~".
3. The leaving person of the bathroom who wash not hands and the person coming say, "Hi~".

1. The white cheesecake that I baked for you since I know you like it is in the fridge.
2. mi sona e ni: pan-suwi-sike-walo pi kiwen pi telo-mama li pona, tawa sina. tan ni la, mi pali-seli e pan pi kulupu-ni. ni li lon tomo-nanpa pi moku-lete.
3. I know this: the white cake of (rock of parent-fluid) is good, for you. For this reason, I baked a cake of that group. It is in the electronic enclosure of cold food.